.TH TIERFS 1 "2026-03-01" "tierfs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
tierfs \- transparent N\-tier FUSE storage tiering daemon
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tierfs
.RB [ \-config
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-version ]
.RB [ \-help ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tierfs
mounts a FUSE filesystem at a configured path and transparently moves files
across N storage tiers according to a declarative TOML policy.
Applications read and write a single mount point;
.B tierfs
handles placement, async replication, digest verification, and eviction invisibly.
.PP
Files are always written to the hottest tier (priority 0).
An async replication worker pool copies files to colder tiers after write.
An eviction loop removes files from a tier once a verified copy exists on a
colder tier and the configured age has elapsed.
Cold\-tier reads are served by staging a temporary local copy;
promote\-on\-read can automatically bring frequently re\-accessed cold files
back to a hot tier.
.PP
.B tierfs
is designed for media\-heavy workloads such as Frigate NVR, Immich, and
general surveillance or media server deployments, but is application\-agnostic.
Any process that writes files to the mount point works with
.B tierfs
without modification.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-config " path"
Path to the TOML configuration file.
Default:
.IR /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml .
The file is read once at startup; changes require a restart.
.TP
.B \-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B tierfs
is configured entirely via its TOML configuration file.
The file specifies the mount point, metadata database path,
replication and eviction parameters, observability settings,
backend storage targets, tier definitions, and policy rules.
.PP
See
.BR tierfs.toml (5)
and
.I docs/CONFIGURATION.md
for the complete field reference and example configurations.
.PP
Key stanza types:
.TP
.B [mount]
Mount point path, SQLite metadata database path, and staging directory.
.TP
.B [replication]
Worker count, retry parameters, and post\-copy verification mode
.RB ( none ,
.BR size ,
or
.BR digest ).
.TP
.B [eviction]
Tick interval, capacity threshold, and headroom watermark.
.TP
.B [observability]
Structured JSON logging (zap + lumberjack rotation), Prometheus metrics,
and OpenTelemetry OTLP tracing.
.TP
.B [[backend]]
Named storage target with URI
.RB ( file:///path
or
.BR s3://bucket/prefix )
and optional S3 endpoint and credential fields.
.TP
.B [[tier]]
Named tier referencing a backend, with priority (0 = hottest) and capacity.
.TP
.B [[rule]]
Glob\-matched policy rule with eviction schedule, pin\-tier, promote\-on\-read,
and replication flags.
.
.SH TIER POLICY
Rules are evaluated in declaration order; the first matching rule governs a file.
A catch\-all rule
.RB ( match\ =\ "**" )
at the end of the rules list is required.
.PP
.B Eviction schedule
.RS
Each rule may specify an
.I evict_schedule
list of steps of the form
.RI { after\ =\ "24h" ,\ to\ =\ "tier1" }.
A file is evicted from its current tier to the destination tier when:
(a) the file has resided on the current tier for at least
.I after
duration; and
(b) a digest\-verified copy exists on the destination tier.
Steps are evaluated independently on each evictor tick.
.RE
.PP
.B Pin tier
.RS
A rule with
.I pin_tier
set exempts matching files from auto\-eviction from that tier.
The file may still be deleted via
.IR unlink (2).
.RE
.PP
.B Promote on read
.RS
When a cold\-tier file is accessed and the matching rule specifies
.IR promote_on_read ,
a copy job is enqueued to bring the file back to the named tier.
This enables access\-based caching.
.RE
.PP
.B Capacity pressure
.RS
When a tier's metadata\-tracked usage exceeds
.I capacity_threshold
(default 0.85), the evictor evicts the oldest synced files on that tier
(regardless of age schedule) until usage falls below
.I capacity_headroom
(default 0.70).
Eviction only proceeds if a verified copy exists on a colder tier.
.RE
.
.SH BACKENDS
.SS file:// \(em Local and Network Filesystem Backend
.nf
uri = "file:///data/ssd/cctv"
uri = "file:///mnt/nas/cctv"      # NFS or SMB mount
.fi
.PP
Files are stored in a directory tree rooted at the given path, mirroring
the relative paths of the virtual filesystem.
Writes use atomic rename (temp file in same directory + \fBrename\fR(2)) to
prevent readers from seeing partial files.
Local file backends support zero\-copy FUSE reads via kernel page cache
(the FUSE layer opens the real file descriptor directly).
.SS s3:// \(em S3\-Compatible Object Storage Backend
.nf
uri        = "s3://bucket/optional\-prefix"
endpoint   = "https://minio.lan:9000"    # omit for AWS S3
region     = "us\-east\-1"
path_style = true                        # required for MinIO, Ceph
.fi
.PP
Credentials are read from environment variables
.B AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
and
.B AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
(preferred), or from the
.I access_key
and
.I secret_key
config fields, or from the AWS shared credentials file.
Multipart upload is used for files larger than 16\ MiB with 4 concurrent parts.
S3 backends do not support zero\-copy FUSE reads; cold reads are staged to
.IR stage_dir .
.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.BR SIGTERM ", " SIGINT
Initiate graceful shutdown:
unmount the FUSE filesystem,
drain in\-flight FUSE operations,
stop replication and eviction workers (waits for current jobs to complete),
flush observability (metrics server, tracer),
close the SQLite database (WAL checkpoint).
Typical shutdown time is under 5 seconds; allow up to 60 seconds for large
in\-flight copies to complete.
.TP
.B SIGKILL
Immediate process termination.
SQLite WAL mode provides crash recovery; metadata will be consistent on restart.
In\-flight writes may leave files in
.I StateWriting
in metadata; treat them as corrupted.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean shutdown after successful
.BR SIGTERM / SIGINT .
.TP
.B 1
Configuration error (missing required field, invalid value, undefined tier
reference, missing catch\-all rule).
The specific error is printed to stderr.
.TP
.B 2
Mount error: FUSE mount failed (permissions, missing
.IR /dev/fuse ,
mount point not empty, or
.B fusermount3
not installed).
.TP
.B 3
Runtime error: metadata store failed to open, observability initialisation
failed, or a required backend is unreachable at startup.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
S3 access key ID.
Takes precedence over the
.I access_key
config field.
.TP
.B AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
S3 secret access key.
Takes precedence over the
.I secret_key
config field.
.TP
.B AWS_REGION
S3 region override.
Takes precedence over the
.I region
config field.
.TP
.B AWS_ENDPOINT_URL
S3 endpoint override (AWS SDK v2 standard environment variable).
Takes precedence over the
.I endpoint
config field.
.TP
.B B2_APPLICATION_KEY_ID
Backblaze B2 key ID.
Use as
.B AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
when targeting a Backblaze S3\-compatible endpoint.
.TP
.B B2_APPLICATION_KEY
Backblaze B2 application key.
Use as
.B AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
when targeting a Backblaze S3\-compatible endpoint.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml
Default configuration file location.
Override with
.BR \-config .
.TP
.I /var/lib/tierfs/meta.db
Default SQLite metadata database.
Configurable via
.I [mount] meta_db
in the config file.
Contains the
.I files
and
.I file_tiers
tables.
Back up with
.nf
sqlite3 /var/lib/tierfs/meta.db ".backup /backup/meta.db"
.fi
.TP
.I /tmp/tierfs-stage
Default staging directory for remote\-tier reads.
Configurable via
.I [mount] stage_dir
in the config file.
Temporary staged files are removed after the FUSE file handle is closed.
.TP
.I /var/log/tierfs/tierfs.log
Log file if a file sink is configured in
.IR [observability.logging] .
Not created by default (stdout only).
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS 1. Mount with the default configuration file
.nf
tierfs
.fi
.PP
Reads
.IR /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml ,
mounts at the path specified by
.IR [mount] path ,
and runs until
.BR SIGTERM .
.
.SS 2. Mount with a custom configuration path
.nf
tierfs \-config /home/user/my\-tierfs.toml
.fi
.
.SS 3. Run in the foreground with debug logging
Override the log level in the config file for a debug session:
.nf
# In tierfs.toml:
[observability.logging]
level  = "debug"
format = "console"   # human\-readable for interactive use

tierfs \-config /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml
# Press Ctrl\-C (SIGINT) to unmount and exit cleanly
.fi
.
.SS 4. Docker run (Frigate NVR alongside)
.nf
docker run \-d \e
  \-\-name tierfs \e
  \-\-cap\-add SYS_ADMIN \e
  \-\-device /dev/fuse \e
  \-\-security\-opt apparmor:unconfined \e
  \-v /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml:/etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml:ro \e
  \-v /data/ssd/cctv:/data/tier0 \e
  \-v /mnt/nas/cctv:/data/tier1 \e
  \-v /var/lib/tierfs:/var/lib/tierfs \e
  \-v /share/CCTV:/share/CCTV:shared \e
  \-p 9100:9100 \e
  \-e AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \e
  \-e AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY \e
  ghcr.io/mikey-austin/tierfs:latest
.fi
.
.SS 5. Run once for testing with systemd\-run
.nf
sudo systemd\-run \e
  \-\-unit=tierfs\-test \e
  \-\-property=AmbientCapabilities=CAP_SYS_ADMIN \e
  \-\-property=DeviceAllow='/dev/fuse rw' \e
  /usr/local/bin/tierfs \-config /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml
.fi
.PP
Stop and clean up with:
.nf
sudo systemctl stop tierfs\-test
.fi
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B "mount: failed to mount: permission denied"
The process does not have
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
or
.I /dev/fuse
is not accessible.
Add
.I user_allow_other
to
.I /etc/fuse.conf
and run as the fuse group, or run as root.
.TP
.B "load config: open /etc/tierfs/tierfs.toml: no such file or directory"
The configuration file does not exist at the default path.
Create it or specify a path with
.BR \-config .
.TP
.B "tier \(dqtier1\(dq references unknown backend \(dqnas\(dq"
A
.B [[tier]]
block references a
.I backend
name that has no matching
.B [[backend]]
block.
Add the
.B [[backend]]
definition.
.TP
.B "no catch\-all rule found"
The
.B [[rule]]
list does not contain a rule with
.IR "match = \"**\"" .
Add one as the last rule.
.TP
.B "database is locked"
Another
.B tierfs
process (or a zombie) has the SQLite database open.
Check with
.B fuser
.IR /var/lib/tierfs/meta.db .
.TP
.B "digest verification failed: want <hash> got <hash>"
The copy to the destination tier produced a different digest than the source.
The destination copy has been deleted.
The job will be retried.
If this recurs, investigate the destination backend for corruption or truncation.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tierfs.toml (5),
.BR fuse (8),
.BR fusermount3 (1),
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR systemd.service (5)
.PP
Full documentation:
.UR https://github.com/mikey-austin/tierfs
.UE
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.UR https://github.com/mikey-austin/tierfs/issues
.UE
.PP
Security vulnerabilities: email
.MT security@PLACEHOLDER
.ME
before opening a public issue.
.
.SH AUTHORS
mikey-austin and contributors.
.PP
See
.I CONTRIBUTING.md
for how to contribute.
